=for stopwords
const printf-style Allbery

=head1 NAME

is_int, is_double, is_string, is_hex - Check values for a TAP test

=head1 SYNOPSIS

#include <tap/basic.h>

void B<is_int>(long I<wanted>, long I<seen>, const char *I<format>, ...);

void B<is_double>(double I<wanted>, double I<seen>, double I<epsilon>,
               const char *I<format>, ...);

void B<is_string>(const char *I<wanted>, const char *I<seen>,
               const char *I<format>, ...);

void B<is_hex>(unsigned long I<wanted>, unsigned long I<seen>,
            const char *I<format>, ...);

=head1 DESCRIPTION

These functions compare two values and report success to a TAP harness if
the values match and failure otherwise.  In each case, I<format> may be
NULL; if not NULL, I<format> should be a printf-style format string with
possible optional arguments giving the name or intention of this test.
I<format> should be specified where possible to make it easier to track
failures down to specific tests.

is_int() compares two longs, is_double() compares two doubles, is_string()
compares two strings, and is_hex() compares two unsigned longs.  The
advantage of these functions over ok() is that, if the values don't match,
the expected and seen values are reported as diagnostics to make it easier
to understand the test failure.

is_double() takes an I<epsilon> value and considers the two values equal
if their difference is less than I<epsilon>.  This avoids problems with
rounding errors in representation of floating point numbers.  I<wanted>
and I<seen> may be positive or negative infinity or NaN as well as a
regular number.  If the expected value is NaN (not a number), any I<seen>
NaN value is considered equal to it, contrary to the normal NaN behavior.

is_string() correctly handles NULL values for both I<wanted> and I<seen>.

is_hex() reports its values as hex strings and is useful for testing flags
or similar values.

=head1 RETURN VALUE

None.

=head1 CAVEATS

is_double() is not safe to use with the results of calculations since it
doesn't provide a way to specify an epsilon value within which two doubles
should still be considered equal.

plan() or plan_lazy() should always be called before calling any of these
functions.

=head1 SEE ALSO

ok(3), plan(3)

The current version of the C TAP Harness library is available from its web
page at L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/c-tap-harness/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>

=cut
