=for stopwords
runtests builddir srcdir Automake preprocessor subdirectory todo Allbery
reimplementation executables API

=head1 NAME

runtests - Harness for running TAP-compliant test scripts

=head1 SYNOPSIS

B<runtests> [B<-h>] [B<-b> I<builddir>] [B<-s> I<srcdir>] I<test> ...

B<runtests> [B<-b> I<builddir>] [B<-s> I<srcdir>] B<-l> I<test-list>

B<runtests> B<-o> [B<-b> I<builddir>] [B<-s> I<srcdir>] I<test>

=head1 DESCRIPTION

B<runtests> is a pure C implementation of a harness for test scripts using
TAP (the Test Anything Protocol).  This is the text-based protocol used by
Perl's test suite and implemented in Perl by Test::Harness.  B<runtests>
is a pure C reimplementation of Test::Harness that supports some
additional features useful for C-based software packages that use
Automake.

By default, the arguments to B<runtests> are taken as tests to run.  The
tests to run can instead be listed in a file, one per line, passed to
B<runtests> with the B<-l> option.  Either way, each test name should be a
path to an executable, possibly with a trailing C<-t> or C<.t> removed.
The path should normally be given as relative to the source or build
directory; see below for source and build directory handling.  B<runtests>
will run each test program in the order listed and summarize the results.

If B<runtests> is given the B<-o> option, it instead runs a single test
program given on the command line.  This is equivalent to running the
program directly except that the program will be searched for in the
SOURCE and BUILD directories and the environment will be set up as
described below.

When B<runtests> is built, if the C preprocessor symbols SOURCE and BUILD
are defined, they're taken to be paths to the source and build directory
for the test suite (normally a subdirectory of the main source or build
directory for the package).  These paths can also be set with the B<-s>
and B<-b> options, respectively.  If these paths are set, via either
means, they're exported in the SOURCE and BUILD environment variables to
all test programs.

If set, the SOURCE and BUILD directories are also used to find test
programs.  If a test program named in I<test-list> or given on the command
line with B<-o> is not found relative to the current directory, it is
looked for in the BUILD directory and then in the SOURCE directory (if
either is set).  This only applies to tests that are not absolute paths.

=head1 OPTIONS

=over 4

=item B<-b> I<builddir>

Sets the build directory, overriding a BUILD preprocessor directive set
at build time.  This directory will be put into the BUILD environment
variable, and test programs not found relative to the current working
directory of B<runtests> will be searched for relative to this directory
next.

=item B<-h>

Display a usage message and exit, doing nothing else.

=item B<-l> I<test-list>

Rather than taking the list of tests to run from the command line, read
the list of tests from the provided I<test-list> file.  Each line of the
file should be the name of the test, without any trailing C<-t> or C<.t>.

=item B<-o>

Rather than running all tests listed in a test list, run the single test
program named on the command line.  This program will be searched for
using the same algorithm used for test programs listed in a test list and
will have the same environment setup, but all of its output will be
displayed and the exit status will match its exit status.

=item B<-s> I<srcdir>

Sets the source directory, overriding a SOURCE preprocessor directive set
at build time.  This directory will be put into the SOURCE environment
variable and test programs not found relative to the current working
directory of B<runtests> or the BUILD directory will be searched for
relative to this directory.

=back

=head1 TEST PROTOCOL

The canonical documentation for TAP is L<TAP::Parser::Grammar> or, in
older versions of Perl, L<Test::Harness::TAP>.  This is a brief summary.

Every individual test done by a test script must get a unique number.  The
output of each test executable should contain:

    1..<last>

where <last> is the number of the last test.  C<1..> may be omitted.
Normally, this line is given first, but B<runtests> allows it to be given
anywhere in the test output (in case the number of tests are determined
dynamically for some reason).

For each test, the script must output a line to standard output in one of
these three formats:

    ok <number>
    not ok <number>
    ok <number> # skip <reason>
    not ok <number> # todo <reason>

where <number> is the test number.  The <number> may be followed by an
optional comment except in the last two forms.  The last two forms both
indicate a skipped test.  <reason> should be some brief reason for why the
test was skipped, but is optional.

As a special case, the first line of the output may be in the form:

    1..0 # skip some reason

which indicates that this entire test case should be skipped and gives a
reason.

All other output lines are ignored, although for compliance with the TAP
protocol all other output should go to standard error or begin with a C<#>
sign.

=head1 ENVIRONMENT

=over 4

=item BUILD

Set to the value of the C preprocessor symbol BUILD when B<runtests> was
built or the B<-b> option, if either was set.

=item SOURCE

Set to the value of the C preprocessor symbol SOURCE when B<runtests> was
built or the B<-s> option, if either was set.

=back

=head1 NOTES

B<runtests> does not abort the entire test suite when one of the tests
bails out (via the bail() C API or the equivalent Perl BAIL_OUT call).  It
only aborts the rest of that test program and then moves to the next one.
This is contrary to the Perl Test::More documentation, but the Perl
B<prove> behavior seems less useful.  Separate test cases should be
independent, so the harness should be able to continue with other testing
despite one test program failing.

While not required, arranging for the test programs to end in C<-t>
(preferred since it doesn't cause confusion with extensions) or C<.t> is
recommended because it keeps the test executable name distinct from any
executables that are part of the main purpose of the package.  This will
also allow a future version of B<runtests> to find all test programs by
recursively searching a directory.

Consider using prove(1) instead of this test suite harness if you're
testing Perl packages.  It has more features for handling Perl test
scripts.  It does not, however, have the BUILD and SOURCE search and
environment handling, and it assumes all test cases are written in Perl
unless run with special options.

TAP version directives in the TAP output are currently just ignored.
These are part of the official grammar for future compatibility, but the
version has not yet been used for anything, so ignoring them seems to be
the best approach for now.

=head1 BUGS

The following features of TAP are not yet implemented by this harness:

=over 2

=item *

The text after C<# skip> should be reported as the reason for the skipped
test.

=back

=head1 SEE ALSO

prove(1), TAP::Parser::Grammar(3), Test::Harness(3), Test::Harness::TAP(3)

The current version of this program is available from its web page at
L<http://www.eyrie.org/~eagle/software/c-tap-harness/>.

=head1 AUTHOR

Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>

=head1 COPYRIGHT AND LICENSE

Copyright 2009, 2010, 2011, 2013 Russ Allbery <rra@stanford.edu>

Copying and distribution of this file, with or without modification, are
permitted in any medium without royalty provided the copyright notice and
this notice are preserved.  This file is offered as-is, without any
warranty.

=cut
